The transcriptomes of two distinct physiological moments of root dehydration condition were scrutinized in cowpea. The RD25 (first 25 min after root dehydration imposition) physiological data did not indicate significant alterations. For the other treatment, 150 min under root dehydration (RD150), all physiological data indicated that the studied cultivar was under stress. The physiological differences between RD25 and RD150 reverberated in the respective transcriptomes. The sets of in silico differentially expressed isoforms showed specificity for each treatment time. The comparison of T25 | UR [up-regulated transcripts in T25 (RD25 vs. Cont25)] vs. T150 | UR [up-regulated transcripts in T150 (RD150 vs. Cont150)] enriched GO terms (associated with abiotic stresses), despite certain similarities, showed us that they were associated with the respective physiological moments. Concerning gene families, a large portion of those present in the T25 | UR were associated with signaling processes; for T150 | UR, a miscellany of families (from transcription factors to nonenzymatic proteins) was observed. The plotting of transcriptomics data in the KEGG Pathway database indicated a change in the topology of activated metabolic modules in T25 | UR vs. T150 | UR. For the latter, it was observed that most activated modules were associated with specialized metabolism. C2H2 and BPC1 transcription factors (TFs) sites were enriched at T25 | UR and T150 | UR gene promoters, suggesting the importance of these TFs for cowpea response to root dehydration. Our work provides insights into specific molecular actors and pathways, enhancing our global understanding of cowpea stress response
The present work represents a pioneering effort, being the first to analyze genomic and transcriptomic data from Vigna unguiculata (cowpea) kinases. We evaluated the cowpea kinome considering its genome-wide distribution and structural characteristics (at the gene and protein levels), sequence evolution, conservation among Viridiplantae species, and gene expression in three cowpea genotypes under different stress situations, including biotic (injury followed by virus inoculation—CABMV or CPSMV) and abiotic (root dehydration). The structural features of cowpea kinases (VuPKs) indicated that 1,293 bona fide VuPKs covered 20 groups and 118 different families. The RLK-Pelle was the largest group, with 908 members. Insights on the mechanisms of VuPK genomic expansion and conservation among Viridiplantae species indicated dispersed and tandem duplications as major forces for VuPKs’ distribution pattern and high orthology indexes and synteny with other legume species, respectively. Ka/Ks ratios showed that almost all (91%) of the tandem duplication events were under purifying selection. Candidate cis-regulatory elements were associated with different transcription factors (TFs) in the promoter regions of the RLK-Pelle group. C2H2 TFs were closely associated with the promoter regions of almost all scrutinized families for the mentioned group. At the transcriptional level, it was suggested that VuPK up-regulation was stress, genotype, or tissue dependent (or a combination of them). The most prominent families in responding (up-regulation) to all the analyzed stresses were RLK-Pelle_DLSV and CAMK_CAMKL-CHK1. Concerning root dehydration, it was suggested that the up-regulated VuPKs are associated with ABA hormone signaling, auxin hormone transport, and potassium ion metabolism. Additionally, up-regulated VuPKs under root dehydration potentially assist in a critical physiological strategy of the studied cowpea genotype in this assay, with activation of defense mechanisms against biotic stress while responding to root dehydration. This study provides the foundation for further studies on the evolution and molecular function of VuPKs.
This work presents a robust analysis of the inositols (INSs) and raffinose family oligosaccharides (RFOs) pathways, using genomic and transcriptomic tools in cowpea under root dehydration. Nineteen (~70%) of the 26 scrutinized enzymes presented transcriptional up-regulation in at least one treatment time. The transcriptional orchestration allowed categorization of the analyzed enzymes as time-independent (those showing the same regulation throughout the assay) and time-dependent (those showing different transcriptional regulation over time). It is suggested that up-regulated time-independent enzymes (INSs: myo-inositol oxygenase, inositol-tetrakisphosphate 1-kinase 3, phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase 4-like, 1-phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate 5-kinase, phosphoinositide phospholipase C, and non-specific phospholipase C; RFOs: α-galactosidase, invertase, and raffinose synthase) actively participate in the reorganization of cowpea molecular physiology under the applied stress. In turn, time-dependent enzymes, especially those up-regulated in some of the treatment times (INSs: inositol-pentakisphosphate 2-kinase, phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase, phosphatidylinositol synthase, multiple inositol polyphosphate phosphatase 1, methylmalonate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase, triosephosphate isomerase, myo-inositol-3-phosphate synthase, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate 3-phosphatase and protein-tyrosine-phosphatase, and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; RFOs: galactinol synthase) seem to participate in fine-tuning of the molecular physiology, helping the cowpea plants to acclimatize under dehydration stress. Not all loci encoding the studied enzymes were expressed during the assay; most of the expressed ones exhibited a variable transcriptional profile in the different treatment times. Genes of the INSs and RFOs pathways showed high orthology with analyzed Phaseoleae members, suggesting a relevant role within this legume group. Regarding the promoter regions of INSs and RFOs genes, some bona fide cis-regulatory elements were identified in association with seven transcription factor families (AP2-EFR, Dof-type, MADS-box, bZIP, CPP, ZF-HD, and GATA-type). Members of INSs and RFOs pathways potentially participate in other processes regulated by these proteins in cowpea.
This work is a comprehensive perspective on INS (inositol and inositol phosphates) and RFO (Raffinose Family Oligosaccharides) pathways in soybean. Besides genomic analysis, NGS-based transcriptomic methods (HT-SuperSAGE and RNA-Seq) were applied to contrast (tolerant and sensitive) soybean accessions under root dehydration. INS and RFO genes formed large gene families distributed over all twenty soybean chromosomes, and being broadly conserved within the legume clade. In addition, phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C loci, not predicted in previous reports, were identified in the soybean genome. In reference to INS and RFO gene promoter regions, bona fide candidate cis-regulatory elements associated with eight (BBR-BPC, Dof-type, MYB-related, AP2-ERF, MADS-box, WRKY62, SRM1, and Squamosa) different transcription factors were found. Such molecules participate in various processes of plant physiology (e.g., plant defense) suggesting the studied pathways (or specific enzymes) could also participate in these processes in soybean plants. Regarding the transcriptomic assays, both approaches applied had satisfactory results. The transcriptional orchestration of the genes encoding phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 5-kinase 6 and galactinol synthase (both induced), besides phosphatidylinositol synthase, myo-inositol monophosphatase and stachyose synthase (all constitutive) enzymes, which modulated similarly in the studied accessions, could represent a general transcriptional signature of both active pathways in soybean plants under root dehydration. The difference observed between the contrasting accessions was associated with the validated transcriptional orchestration (induced, in the tolerant accession; constitutive, in the sensitive accession) of the 1-phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate 5-kinase enzyme. The results add information to these poorly studied pathways and provide a valuable resource of soybean genes/transcripts that will benefit other studies in this field.
For sessile organisms such as plants, regulatory mechanisms of gene expression are vital, since they remain exposed to climatic and biological threats. Thus, they have to face hazards with instantaneous reorganization of their internal environment. For this purpose, besides the use of transcription factors, the participation of chromatin as an active factor in the regulation of transcription is crucial. Chemical changes in chromatin structure affect the accessibility of the transcriptional machinery and acting in signaling, engaging/inhibiting factors that participate in the transcription processes. Mechanisms in which gene expression undergoes changes without the occurrence of DNA gene mutations in the monomers that make up DNA, are understood as epigenetic phenomena. These include (1) post-translational modifications of histones, which results in stimulation or repression of gene activity and (2) cytosine methylation in the promoter region of individual genes, both preventing access of transcriptional activators as well as signaling the recruitment of repressors. There is evidence that such modifications can pass on to subsequent generations of daughter cells and even generations of individuals. However, reports indicate that they persist only in the presence of a stressor factor (or an inductor of the above-mentioned modifications). In its absence, these modifications weaken or lose heritability, being eliminated in the next few generations. In this review, it is argued how epigenetic signals influence gene regulation, the mechanisms involved and their participation in processes of resistance to biotic stresses, controlling processes of the plant immune system. 
Drought is a significant constraint to yield increase in soybean. The early perception of water deprivation is critical for recruitment of genes that promote plant tolerance. DeepSuperSAGE libraries, including one control and a bulk of six stress times imposed (from 25 to 150 min of root dehydration) for drought-tolerant and sensitive soybean accessions, allowed to identify new molecular targets for drought tolerance. The survey uncovered 120,770 unique transcripts expressed by the contrasting accessions. Of these, 57,610 aligned with known cDNA sequences, allowing the annotation of 32,373 unitags. A total of 1,127 unitags were up-regulated only in the tolerant accession, whereas 1,557 were up-regulated in both as compared to their controls. An expression profile concerning the most representative Gene Ontology (GO) categories for the tolerant accession revealed the expression “protein binding” as the most represented for “Molecular Function”, whereas CDPK and CBL were the most up-regulated protein families in this category. Furthermore, particular genes expressed different isoforms according to the accession, showing the potential to operate in the distinction of physiological behaviors. Besides, heat maps comprising GO categories related to abiotic stress response and the unitags regulation observed in the expression contrasts covering tolerant and sensitive accessions, revealed the unitags potential for plant breeding. Candidate genes related to “hormone response” (LOX, ERF1b, XET), “water response” (PUB, BMY), “salt stress response” (WRKY, MYB) and “oxidative stress response” (PER) figured among the most promising molecular targets. Additionally, nine transcripts (HMGR, XET, WRKY20, RAP2-4, EREBP, NAC3, PER, GPX5 and BMY) validated by RT-qPCR (four different time points) confirmed their differential expression and pointed that already after 25 minutes a transcriptional reorganization started in response to the new condition, with important differences between both accessions. 
